Well, good morning everyone.
Question, did everybody get one of these on the way in?
I think the girls did a great job,
but does anybody need one?
Amanda.
You were here before everybody, right?
That helps.
Yeah, one more.
No, you were here before everybody.
Anybody else need one?
Okay, good.
If you need more, they're up here.
So, excited today to be able to jump into the second week
of our series, Shalom Shalom,
and just kind of make sure everybody's on the same page.
Shalom, shalom is God's perfect peace.
He talks about perfect peace.
And so when it's repeated, it creates this perfection.
And so God's perfect peace in the midst
of our mental struggles.
And that sounds like a crazy topic.
And I know most of you were here last week,
but like, why are we gonna jump off into this?
And it comes to this point of,
I think our society deals with a lot of mental struggles
and doesn't know where to go and what we should do
and where we should seek to find truth and help.
And so we're willing to tackle that subject.
Thank God it's not only on my own ability.
So I have, again, mentioned this to you before,
there's a group that has walked through a sermon series
like this before, and they have a lot of wisdom biblically,
and also from the mental health side of professionals
that knows how to help us be able to use God's word
to open up into our lives.
And so we brought this into our church,
in our context and our lives to be able to see how we can apply it and hopefully
this is valuable for you. And so I really want to start off with this. Today
we're talking about how God can heal our anxious minds and how God's perfect
peace can help us in the midst of our anxiety. And I really want to share with
you the moment that I remember, one of the most critical moments whenever I
experienced anxiety. I remember one morning when I was a pastor in Oklahoma
waking up and just feeling uneasy.
And it was that moment that my feet hit the floor
that I could not seem to find peace.
I was overwhelmed with the day
and everything that was coming up this week
and I could not shake it.
I got in my car thinking, hey, let me just eat breakfast.
Let me just get down the road.
Let me just get to work.
It'll all go away.
And I remember getting into work and it only got worse.
And I felt like that my heart was beating out of my chest
and I was breathing a little bit differently.
And it was that moment that I realized
I was basically dealing with an anxiety attack
over my situation.
And I love how God works,
and God's timing always brings things into your life,
like a scripture or a person.
And just so happened that day as I was listening to music,
'cause usually I do that to try to calm my anxious mind,
and this song came on.
And so I just wanna read these to you.
I'm not gonna sing 'em,
'cause you guys will not enjoy that.
So I'm gonna read this to you.
And this really spoke to me,
and I'm gonna see if this speaks to you as well
about maybe what you deal with in your life.
And so this is Johnny D.S.
It's the song "Breathe."
And this is what he says in verse one.
He says, "Alarm clock screaming, bare feet hit the floor.
"It's off to the races, everybody out the door.
"I'm feeling like I'm falling behind.
"It's a crazy life, 90 miles an hour,
"going fast as I can, trying to push a little harder,
"trying to get the upper hand.
"So much to do in so little time.
"It's a crazy life.
"It's ready, set, go, another wild day
"When stress is on the rise, in my heart,
"I feel you say, 'Just breathe.'"
He says, "Just breathe.
"Come and rest at my feet and just be, and just be.
"Chaos calls, but what all you really need
"is to just breathe."
And then the next verse really rings true.
He says, "Third cup of Joe,"
even though I don't drink coffee, maybe this is you,
"Third cup of Joe, just to get me through the day,
"want to make the most of my time, but I feel it slip away.
"I wonder if there's something more to this crazy life.
"I'm busy, busy, busy, and it's no surprise to see
"that I only have time for me, me, me.
"There's gotta be something more to this crazy life.
"I'm hanging on tight to another wild day
"when it all starts to fall apart,
"and my heart, I hear you say, just breathe."
And he goes on and he says this,
"Chaos calls, but all you really need to do
"is to take it in and to fill your lungs.
"the peace of God that overcomes, just breathe.
"So let your weary spirit rest.
"Lay down what's good and find what's best.
"Just breathe."
I remember hearing that verse, or not verse,
that song in my music as I was listening to that day
and it hit me, "This is my life."
And I don't know if you can relate at all
at times where you feel like that there's always
so much to do and there's all these anxious thoughts
and all these things that are on your heart and mind
and you don't know what to do.
So my hope and prayer is that today,
as we walk through the sermon series,
that God will be able to help you see
how he can heal our anxious minds.
A verse that I think of whenever I think about being anxious
is Philippians 4, four through six.
It says this, "Rejoice always in the Lord.
"I will say it again, rejoice.
"Let your gentleness be evident to all.
"The Lord is near.
"Do not be anxious about anything."
Anybody ever read a verse in the Bible and you go,
is that possible?
Maybe I'm the only one, okay.
This is moments where you look here and you're like,
don't be anxious for anything.
And you're like, is that possible?
I think at times, guys, we struggle with it, right?
Is it possible?
And especially when you, I always tell people this,
whenever you sometimes have those friends
that will say you shouldn't be anxious,
you're blessed, you're a follower of Jesus,
you have a great family, you have this, this, this, and this
and you're like, but I still am struggling
with being anxious.
Like it doesn't help.
And I know they're trying to mean good,
so that's not a knock on them,
keep being a good friend to show up.
But sometimes I think at times I want people
to just sit with me, not to try to help me.
I don't know if that makes sense.
I just need people to sit with me
and to experience what I'm going through
when it comes to being maybe anxious.
And so, whenever we think about today's society,
we have a lot to be stressed about, right?
There's a lot of financial pressures,
and if you've lived in this world long enough
in the last couple of years,
between all of the inflation,
all of the, everything, everything's going up.
If you think about just, if you have kids,
your kids' activities, you add that into relational stress,
job stress, it makes sense why we would have anxiety.
And so, if you're wondering, you know,
are you the only one, the truth is, you're not.
Statistics say, as you look at them, in 2019 they did a poll.
Two out of three Americans said they were anxious
or extremely anxious.
Does anybody know what happened after 2019?
Anybody remember?
I think that percentage has went way up.
And how much more can you get than two out of three?
So a lot of people have experienced anxiety.
And then you also see this, 91% of high school
and college students report consistent
and significant levels of anxiety associated with stress.
Again, when we look at this,
anxiety is one of the most common
mental health issues of our day.
And so if it is, if that's true,
then let's talk about it.
I mean, I think that's what we're saying here as a church.
If it is something that society deals with,
let's talk about it.
This is a safe place.
This is not a place of judgment.
This is a place of hope, a place of caring,
a place of saying, I get it, we get it.
We're all on the same page.
And what you may say is you may have
varying difficulties of anxiety.
Some of you, it comes and goes with opening the mail
based upon, oh, what medical bill am I gonna get?
It comes and goes with doctor visits.
For some of you, it's constant.
It's day in and day out that you're wrestling with it.
And so it's not like necessarily we're all on the same level
and that we don't have to be to sit with one another,
but it's understanding that this is something
that all of us typically deal with.
And I want you to know this.
Again, I'm gonna be drawing conclusions spiritually,
But ultimately, we're gonna have some things
that will help us from the mental health world
that they have suggestions of how we deal with this as well.
And I'm bringing those in, not from my experience,
but from what I've learned.
And so from wherever we are,
I think we just need to dive into God's word and to see this
and so let's pray and then we'll jump in.
So Lord Jesus, thank you so much for today.
Lord, we're just praying that we don't miss your word.
We don't miss the opportunity to be ministered to from you.
And we're just praying that our hearts are open
to receive from you, Lord, what we need
in order to walk through and to deal with
our anxiety in our lives.
And so, Lord, we just pray this in your heavenly name, amen.
So as we look at the story,
I wanna give you just a little bit of background.
Jehoshaphat is a king of the southern kingdom of Judah.
So don't wanna go too long.
Again, there's only so much that I can cover today
in this text with time that we have.
But the Israelites, which were God's redeemed people
that had went into Israel and they had all these 12 tribes.
Eventually they began to disobey the Lord
and the Lord split them into two kingdoms,
the Northern Kingdom and the Southern Kingdom.
So the Southern Kingdom was known to have
a couple of good kings after they were split up.
The Northern Kingdom did not have any good kings at all,
which is crazy.
And so the Southern Kingdom was called Judah.
And this is where we see Jehoshaphat.
And you can call him Jehoshaphat,
that is a hard name sometimes to pronounce,
so you may hear me call him Japhat.
And the only reason why is 'cause it's very easy
to remember, just an encouragement for you.
If you're thinking about boys' names,
I was gonna text Elisa, don't name your son Jehoshaphat
because he probably will be called Japhat.
But I'm gonna get knocked for that one later.
Brittany will tell me that was stupid.
So I'm gonna move on, I digress, I digress, okay.
So as we look at this, again, I wanna encourage you,
I'm not gonna be able to unpack every verse,
so we're not gonna read back through this.
We've already done that today during our prayer time,
but we're gonna kinda hit through a couple of things.
But I wanna mention this, just in the first three verses,
is he talks about three enemies,
three enemies that are attacking him from all sides.
And when we think about this, when it comes to anxiety,
I think typically we can handle one enemy that attacks us.
Let me just give you a great example.
My car doesn't start today.
That's gonna maybe cause some anxiety,
but you know what, I can work through this,
I can call into work late,
I can get a ride to work, no big deal.
But now let's add in the car breaks down,
which means your child can't get to school,
which then means you also don't have the money
to fix your car while you also chose to start a diet that morning. You guys know
at that moment in life we had a lot of enemies attack at the same time. It's
difficult to deal with anxiety in those moments. So Jehoshaphat and the kingdom
of Judah understands that idea of it wasn't just one person attacking them, it
was multiple people attacking them. And I think again when we look at this
sometimes it's easy to think, man we shouldn't be anxious over these things
because Jesus has got this,
but sometimes it's just difficult.
And so we even look at Jesus's life.
If you see Jesus in the garden,
again, just want you to resonate with,
Jesus dealt with the form of anxiety.
When he went to go pray in the garden,
he was so distressed that he sweat blood.
In that moment, that is Jesus experiencing something
so overwhelming in his life
that he asked the Lord to remove it if he could.
So Jesus understands what you're going to.
But I want you to know this, and this is the key today
before we jump in and walk through these verses
is we need to understand that anxiety is not a sin.
It is a symptom.
It's a signal.
And I wanna give you a great example of why that's true.
Couple of weeks ago, I'm in my car and I'm driving
and I didn't have any signals on my car,
like lights go off.
I have an old car, probably those don't work anymore.
But what I did have coming out of my car
was like this fog smoke stuff.
And I thought, ah, maybe something's wrong.
But I kept driving a couple more days,
just using a towel to wipe off my window
because I wanted to just reject the signal
that there was something wrong with my car
because I didn't want to go into the car.
But I decided that this is a sign.
There's something wrong with my car.
Now I want you to think through this.
Number one, this isn't my car's fault.
It has over 200,000 miles on it.
It just happens.
It's going to happen over time.
Also, it's logical enough at that moment.
I need to bring it into a mechanic
'cause I don't know what to do, but the mechanic does.
Now, that's a story from another day.
Yes, $2,400 later, we got it fixed to praise God.
That's stressful.
But the cool part is when we think about anxiety,
when we have it, it's a sign or a signal
that we need Jesus.
We need to take it into the mechanic
who knows what to do because we don't.
We have no clue, but it is a signal and a sign
that we need to go to God.
We need to go to God and we need to go to God
because he is the only one that can fix it.
I love that mentality.
That helps me whenever I think about anxiety.
So we're gonna look at this again, as we battle anxiety,
what do we need to see these signs alerting us to?
And it's alerting us to do three things.
And the first thing we're gonna see in the first 12 verses,
it's alerting us to pray.
So I want us to see this in verse three, it says this,
it says, Jehoshaphat was afraid
and he resolved to seek the Lord.
and then he proclaimed a fast for all of Judah.
See that in this verse, he says he was afraid
or terrified or alarmed or another word, he was anxious.
He was worried about these armies
that were getting ready to attack him and his people.
He was anxious, so he understands this, right?
But we see also if you read into verse four,
he says this, he says, "Who gathered to seek the Lord,"
and this is all the people of Judah,
"then they came and all the city of Judah to seek him."
I noticed something in this.
all in those two verses, they chose to do the same thing,
to seek the Lord, to seek the Lord, to seek the Lord.
It says it three times, and those three times
is that kind of the idea of this is important,
they're not gonna go anywhere else,
but to the Lord for this situation.
And so as they sought the Lord,
they not only did they seek the Lord for guidance,
show me what to do, but they fasted.
And I'll just tell you this, if I'm gonna fast from food,
I must be pretty desperate, just being honest here.
and they fasted because they were so desperate
to hear from the Lord.
They understood their situation.
And when we understand our situation,
when it comes to anxiety in our lives,
understand how important it is to seek the Lord,
to seek the Lord in this.
And so he prays here in verse six, right?
Verses five through, I don't even remember how many verses,
on, I think through 12.
This is a prayer that he prays before his people.
But we're gonna read just verses six
and then we're gonna read verses nine.
He says this in verse six.
He said, "The Lord God of our ancestors,
"are you not the God in heaven?"
I'm reading this wrong here.
He says, "Are you not the God who is in heaven
"and do you not rule over all the kingdoms and nations?
"Power and might are in your hand
"and no one can stand against you."
It's this moment where he is reminding the Lord
of what he said he is.
And when he knows who the Lord is,
He's reminding him, and this is the thing,
God doesn't need to be reminded,
but I think that's Jehoshaphat's way
to even proclaim to his people,
we're gonna remember that the Lord is in control
of all nations and all kingdoms.
Then if you'll look in verse nine, you'll also see this.
He says, "If disaster comes upon us,
"sword or judgment, pestilence or famine,
"we will stand before the temple.
"And before you, Lord, for your name is on this temple,
"and we will cry out to you because of our distress,
and you will hear us and you will deliver us.
One of the things I love about this idea is it's his faith.
His faith in his prayer is praying
what God has already promised.
Do you hear that?
He's praying what God has already promised.
We're thinking about what do we pray?
When you say, Ben, when I have anxiety, pray.
What does that mean?
To repeat to him, to remind yourself
and to remind God who he is.
He got his faithful, he's done it before
and he'll do it again.
And I love this word.
He uses the word will.
He doesn't say if, he says you will hear and deliver.
You know what faith is?
And I'm telling you, I've repeated this to myself
over and over again.
Faith is seeing what God sees,
even though we can't see it.
In the midst of your anxiety, you are struggling.
I get it.
I've been there and I may not fully know your situation
and I'm not claiming to fully know your situation.
but in the midst, we have to see what the Lord sees
on the other side, which is perfect peace.
And remember, perfect peace is not the absence of conflict.
It's the presence of God.
I'm gonna say this again.
Perfect peace is not the absence of conflict.
It is the presence of God in the midst of it.
And I'm gonna do something I don't typically do
in my message, which is tell you something
I'm gonna tell you at the end of my message.
Does anybody remember Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego?
The story where they would not bow down to this big statue
And when they didn't bow down, they said,
"Well, what's gonna happen?
You're gonna get thrown into this flame of fire."
And they're like, "Okay, here's the thing.
If we aren't saved, it doesn't matter.
Our God is still God."
And they're like, "All right, you're going in."
They threw the three of them in, but what did they see?
Does anybody know what they saw in the fire?
It's the fourth image.
Most people would claim that that is the Son of God.
Jesus was with them in the midst,
this is Old Testament, guys, in the midst of this flame.
He said, the king said, "Why is there a fourth image?
And why are they standing up
and walking around in this flame?
And they said, "Well, have them come out."
And so they holler out, "Come out."
They came out and it says that there was not a smell
of smoke on them, nothing was burnt on them.
And in the midst of their chaos,
in the midst of their struggle and their trial,
Jesus's presence was enough.
To me, when I think about having anxiety,
it's not necessarily that there is not those things
around us that causes anxiety is Jesus' presence
that provides us peace.
And we're gonna talk more about this as we continue on,
because I think this will minister to you
as we understand it.
When we think about this reminder
that we can cry out to God, we can be honest.
I want you to tell you this.
When talking to God, basically what Jehoshaphat is doing
is he is crying out and being honest with God.
It is okay to be honest with God, which means this.
It is okay to say, God, I'm struggling to believe you.
It is okay that you say this is too much.
It's okay to be real.
And even not only to God, let me just tell you this,
it is okay to be real here in our church.
Wanna know why?
Because if you can't be real here,
I don't know where else you can be real.
This is a safe place to say, you know what, life sucks.
Now, are we gonna sit there and say,
hey, just wall around, yeah, just say,
no, what we're gonna do is we're gonna wrap our arm
around you and say, I'm so sorry that you're walking
through this, that you're dealing with this.
Man, let's pray and let's seek the God who cares.
I think it's so important we see this.
So as we continue on, this is the part where I'm gonna get
a little bit, you know, doctor-ish, this is not my words,
these are things that I've learned.
And so we'll see here, Dr. Caroline Leaf said this,
and I love this about prayer, she did a study,
and you'll see this in your notes, that recently they found
that 12 minutes of daily focused prayer
over an eight week period can change the brain so much
to an extent that it can be measured on a brain scan.
What does that mean, right?
Basically that means that not only does prayer
touch God's heart, but prayer changes the chemistry
of our brain.
Prayer changes the chemistry of our brain.
So when Jehoshaphat began to pray and focus on the Lord,
it was transforming his mind to focus on God.
I don't know about you guys,
but whenever I begin to think on things that make me anxious,
I go into a dark place at times.
And that's where our minds go.
But here's the cool part.
When we understand that our brain can change,
it means we don't have to stay there.
We don't have to stay there.
Because if we will focus on Jesus,
that as we begin to do that, our minds,
our brains begin to develop something different.
And what will go into another big word, neuroplasticity.
What does that mean?
The more that we think on a thought,
the more likely we are to think on that thought,
and it's easier to do it.
So just to give you a great example,
if you continually say to yourself,
"I'm not a good person, I'm always gonna fail,
"I'm never good enough,"
all these things negative, the more you think on those,
the more you will think on them, it's easier to do.
They're gonna come to mind a lot easier.
So when we think about that idea,
I've shared this quote with you before,
our lives are heading in the direction
of our strongest thoughts.
So if our strongest thoughts are on the things
that make us anxious, what do you expect
that's going to happen, right?
So when we understand there is a way for us
to begin to overcome this, it is changing our mind.
But again, I'm gonna use one more last big word
and I'm done for the day, right?
Anybody ever heard of the amygdala?
Amygdala is a couple of people, right?
We got a couple of people here.
So this is almond-shaped thing in our brain.
And what it's there for is, you know,
imagine if you're out in the woods,
because I'm never out in the woods, but if I was,
there's some of y'all that love the woods,
and you hear the big, you know, like growl out in the woods.
You're not gonna think,
"Oh, you know, that's probably just some thunder over there."
You're probably thinking, "It's a bear."
It's some kind of big animal that you're afraid of.
And you know what your brain says?
Run.
Right, run, right.
And so it's there to cause you to hear something and run
and to focus on that and it's gonna cause you to move.
But what ends up happening is,
when this happens with anxiety,
the things that cause anxiety,
and we begin to flare up and we're thinking,
Freak out, freak out, freak out.
The problem is, is we begin to focus on the things
that freak out on us over and over and over again.
We're consumed with the alarm.
We're consumed with what we are thinking on
and we begin to be anxious.
Okay, I lied, there's one more big word.
One more big word.
The word in the scripture most often translated
as anxiety is this word that's listed in your notes
that I can't hardly say, meronome.
This is what it's really definition is dwelling
or pondering on fearful or anxious thoughts,
dwelling or pondering on fearful or anxious thoughts.
Basically, we're training our brains to be anxious
as we meditate on the negative,
as we begin to think about it.
So here's the question, how do we break the cycle?
It sounds so simple, but we just pray.
But prayer's not natural.
You know what's natural?
To think on the things that make us anxious.
So prayer though, here's the cool part,
prayer is supernatural.
it supersedes the anxious thoughts.
It supersedes it meaning this,
that we need to continue to say,
okay, prayer is how I overcome anxiety.
How do I pray?
I need to pray whatever the word of God says.
I need to pray God's truth.
How do I know God's truth?
Is I get in the word?
Or if I don't even know them and I can't get in the word,
I call a friend who can be that for me,
who can get in the word with me,
who can pray together and seek the Lord with me.
So we need to pray.
And I love this, God has not given us a spirit of fear,
but of power and love and sound mind.
Typically when I quote that verse,
it's in 2 Timothy I believe,
I talk about power and love,
but I always forget that sound mind.
God has given us not a spirit of fear and anxiety,
but of a sound mind.
So again, prayer doesn't just touch the heart of God,
it changes our brain.
And we need to remember that anxiety is not a sin,
it's a signal to do what?
To seek the Lord.
And I want us to read verse 12.
I'm spending most of the time on this prayer part.
Trust me, it's gonna go a little bit faster.
So let's look at verse 12.
Verse 12 says this, it says,
"Our God, will you not judge them?
"For we are powerless before this vast number
"that comes to fight against us.
"But we do not know what to do, but we look to you."
We look to you.
It's so important when we think about this
that we look to God, right?
It's okay to say we don't know what to do.
It's okay to say this vast anxiety and everything in life
from our financial issues to our health issues
to just, I don't know what's going on with my body.
it's okay to tell God you do not know what to do,
but then to turn and say, but I trust in you.
We were never, I'm just telling you,
we were never designed to handle these anxious thoughts
and all these things that cause our anxiety.
We were never designed to handle that.
God has always been the one that's designed to handle that
because His Spirit lives inside of us.
And when we don't have the Spirit of God inside of us,
it's harder to handle.
It's more difficult to handle
and we'll continue to struggle with it.
And so it's a challenge for all of us to remember this,
If it's on God's mind, or so it's on your mind,
it's on God's heart.
If it's on your mind, if you're wrestling through it,
it is on God's heart.
So then, once we pray, then what do we do?
If you're anything like me, when we pray,
we immediately get up and we go do what we can
to fix the problem.
Anybody, I mean, anybody like me, okay, I pray.
I'm good at praying.
I pray and I get up and I just go.
And it's that moment where it's like,
God's going, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
You just asked me to move,
but then you just took it all into your hands.
I mean, I'm a doer.
I love doing things.
I love because I want control.
So this is the important part.
I wanna be as clear as I possibly can.
When we pray, we need to do something else.
And it's one of the hardest things,
and we'll see it in here.
One of the hardest things we do is to pause.
Anxiety is a signal that it's time to pray
and it's time to pause.
That was awkward.
I don't know about you guys.
It's hard.
There's the hardest part of seeking the Lord.
It's the waiting.
I'm just being real honest.
Even as a pastor, I've been serving the Lord a long time,
and we've sought the Lord a lot.
And I'm just being honest.
I'm just being honest.
We've sought the Lord a long time,
and we've sought the Lord a lot.
I mean, I remember when Tegan was in the hospital
and we sought the Lord and there was so much waiting.
It's hard to wait.
I'm just, I wanna be real.
It's hard, so hard.
But in the waiting, God shows up.
God shows up, and this is what we're gonna see here.
As we look at this, right, it says in verse 13
that all of the people stood with their wives
and their kids before the Lord.
They didn't move.
Psalm 46 10 says, "Be still and know that I am God."
It sounds crazy.
So when we pause,
is that where God's gonna heal our anxiety?
Here's what I'll tell you, maybe.
In that moment, God may heal your anxiety immediately.
But here's what it may be.
Sometimes it's more of a process.
It's a process.
What's that process look like?
It could be that he directs you to a Bible verse
in the midst of that pausing.
that gives you peace.
It may be that he directs you to reach out to a friend
because God has given us the body of Christ
to bear one another's burdens.
He may direct you in that pausing to seek help
from a professional that knows how to help you
walk through the mental and anxiety issues
that you are dealing with, which is okay to ask for help.
Right, asking for help is not a sign of weakness,
it's a sign of strength and wisdom.
He may lead you to do some of the most spiritual things,
Sleeping and eating.
In the midst of anxiety, I'll just tell you this,
me and Brittany have talked about this lately.
She'll tell me, "Honey, just go to sleep."
Why?
Because what we're talking about right now,
you're just gonna continue to think negative.
It's true.
I mean, really, this happened like a couple days ago.
Sometimes anxiety is just a result of we're exhausted.
Just rest.
Just be nourished, right?
But sometimes it is a process, right?
So what do we do, right?
Overcoming God starts with,
or overcoming anxiety starts with pursuing God
the whole time.
So what happened while they waited?
We look at verses 15 and 17.
Verses 15 says this, "And he said,
"Listen carefully, all of Judah."
And this is the guy that stood up in the midst of the group
after they were waiting and pausing.
It says, "The Lord said, 'Do not be afraid or discouraged
"'because this vast number for the battle
"'is not yours but God's.'"
Not yours but God's.
Let's look at verse 17.
"You do not have to fight this battle.
"Position yourselves and stand still
"and see the salvation of the Lord.
"He is with you.
"Judah and Jerusalem, do not be afraid or discouraged.
"Tomorrow, go out to face them,
"for the Lord is with you."
For the Lord is with you.
So if you're struggling with anxiety,
I want to tell you this today, this word is for you.
The battle you're going through is not yours to fix.
If you don't know what to do, you're in a good place.
If you're struggling to figure out how to overcome it,
you're in a good place because it is the Lord's battle
to win.
God loves you, he never leaves you nor forsakes you,
even in the midst of your anxiety.
So pausing allows God to work only the way that he can,
right, only the way that he can, supernaturally.
In my experience when pausing,
what I believe has happened for me
is that typically the Lord leads me to a verse.
Typically the Lord leads me to reach out to a friend
and say, "Hey, I'm struggling."
And just so you know, this is me on the other side
of learning some of these things,
because I've been on the other side
where I don't seek wisdom and I don't seek the Lord,
and it is miserable.
So this is me where I feel like God gives me either a song
like I shared with you earlier,
he'll remind me of his faithfulness in the past.
And just mentioning my car, right?
Whenever our car broke down,
just wanna be real with you here.
So my car's blowing that smoke out,
and you know that that happened like the week after
We booked a vacation as a family,
and this is what I said, I think we're good,
as long as one of our cars doesn't break down.
I said that, we were sitting there,
I'm like, ah, we should be good.
And I mean, those are usually the moments
that anxiety will come up,
is when we wonder what are we going to do?
But you know what the coolest part was?
I had some of the most peace during that time.
I was like, okay, we'll figure it out, that's okay.
You know, and I've been taking that stance lately
just because in the end worrying about it adds no value.
It's fine, right, it's fine.
And I share that to say, again,
do I get that right every time?
No, there's sometimes I'm freaking out, okay?
But then again, I come back to the Lord.
I come back to the Lord, and I just want you to know this.
Whenever we realize everything we have,
so let's just think about the things
we can be anxious about, our finances, our marriage,
our kids, our, you name it, right?
Relationships, jobs, all the things
that we could be anxious about.
If you will lay them down at his feet,
they're his, they're his to fix.
So if it's your car, it's his to fix.
If it's your marriage, it's his to restore.
If it's your job, it's his to provide.
You name it, it's his.
I remember my pastor teaching me this.
Whenever he would preach, he would remind us
that if you give over to the Lord, it's his.
So then you go to him to fix it.
You don't have to fix it.
Now does that mean you don't have to do anything?
you're just gonna be stubborn on the other side,
it's like, well, I'm just gonna sit over here.
No, you pause and you listen for the Lord
to lead you to the next thing.
And it's amazing how God shows up every single time.
So I don't know if I'm speaking to you
if you've struggled with that,
but I pray that this is speaking to you.
So as we're kinda heading down to the conclusion here,
we need to remember again, anxiety is not a sin,
it's a signal telling us it's time to pray,
it's time to pause, and the last one is one of my favorite,
it's time to praise, it's time to praise.
So if we see here in verses 18 and following,
I think I'm on here, 18,
it says then, we see this in the beginning,
then Jehoshaphat knelt low with his face to the ground
and all of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem
fell down before the Lord and worshiped him.
What I love about this picture is they begin to praise
before the battle was won.
Praising doesn't just start when he's defeated our anxiety,
praising started beforehand.
They believed the Lord and it was counted to him
as righteousness.
Think about that back to Abraham as well.
So they prayed and they believed that God
was going to show up.
They paused and they waited on the Lord to respond
and he did and they praised.
Let's look at verses 21 and 22.
It says, "Then they consulted with the people
"and appointed some to sing for the Lord
"and some to praise splendor of his holiness.
"And when they went out in the front of the armed forces,
"they kept singing, 'Give thanks to the Lord
"'for his faithful love endures forever.'
And the moment they begin their shouts and praises,
the Lord set an ambush against the Amunites, the Moabites,
and the inhabitants of Mount Seir,
who came to fight against Judah, and they were defeated.
I want you to think through this.
It says that they put the praise team
out in front of the army.
I really started kind of laughing.
I was starting to imagine Matt and Amanda
and the rest of the team that plays on Sunday
just standing out in front of the army,
and I'm just like, go kill 'em.
(audience laughing)
Stick 'em.
We're gonna hang back here, okay?
But like, that sounds crazy.
I mean, not to me, 'cause I'm glad you guys are out front,
but like, that sounds crazy, right?
But God does things that are supernatural.
That's the part.
I think when we think I can't overcome my anxiety,
I'm serious, when we think we can't overcome our anxiety,
we're thinking in our terms.
There's no way.
I've tried it before.
I've been walking through this for 10, 15, 20 years.
There's no way.
That's exactly what we think.
I've been there.
We think God cannot change the situation.
I've done this, this has happened.
It never changes, it never changes, it never changes.
But God is supernatural.
He works way above our mind, right?
His perspective is not limited, ours is.
And so he sends this praise team out to praise the Lord.
The moment that they begin praising, the battle was won.
So God did a miracle, right?
In verse 24, we see this,
"When Judah came to the place to overlook the wilderness,
they saw this large army,
but there were just corpses laying on the ground
and nobody had escaped."
And I know I don't have time to dive off into this
because it sounds very brutal and grueling.
And that's another topic for another day.
But I would say those were the enemies
that they were asking God to defeat.
And God defeated them before they ever got there, right?
I think it's amazing what we see here.
So we're gonna head into invitation.
We're jumping right into invitation.
Why are we jumping into invitation?
Because I think God wants to do some battle for you.
We have prayed and we've talked about prayer.
We have talked about pausing.
We've talked about praising.
And just so you know, I sit in your seat every week.
Sounds weird.
preparing a message each week,
I sit in your seat every week and I write a message
and I pray over a message and God brings about a message
and we look at these things and I'm like,
oh, this is awesome.
But if it doesn't go from here to here, it doesn't matter.
And here's, again, I'm just gonna be honest with you.
Every week that we do invitation,
I sense at times we don't know what to do.
We don't know how to go from here to here.
I think we think, great message,
but how does it transform our hearts and minds?
I want us to do battle with the Lord.
And this is what I wanna read with you,
verses 29 and 30.
I'm gonna start with 29 just to kinda lead us to this.
29 says, "The terror of God was on all of the kingdoms
"of the land when they heard that the Lord had fought
"against the enemies of Israel."
I'm gonna start right there.
"The fear of the Lord came on every other one
of the kingdoms around them.
Let me just, I wanna communicate this.
Our struggles are not against flesh and blood,
but against rulers and against authorities
and cosmic powers, which means this,
we have an enemy that wants to make you think
that you cannot overcome your anxiety.
But I love this verse.
Here's the translation of it.
When God wins the battle for you,
you were telling all the enemies around you,
you are not welcome here,
because my God fights my battles.
My God fights my battles.
Enemy, you're not welcome here.
I shared with the family this week
as I was talking to them on the phone,
you need to pray over your home.
You need to pray over your marriage.
You need to pray over your kids.
The enemy is not welcome here
because the Lord fights my battles.
We need to be praying that.
And then we look at verse 30, and it says this,
then Jehoshaphat and the kingdom was quiet,
for his God gave him rest.
Let's translate that.
God gave him peace on every side.
He provides perfect peace.
Again, perfect peace is found not in the absence of trials,
but on the presence of God,
fighting your battles for you every single week.
I remind you of that Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
'cause again, I jumped down on my notes,
but remember their faith to jump into that fire
knowing whether they were saved or not,
and Jesus showed up.
You want Jesus to show up for you today?
He will, He will.
So the question is, hey, I'm preaching these messages
out of experience, right?
I'm not preaching from, I don't know what anxiety is like,
I'm preaching them from I do know what anxiety is like.
So you may ask, or should been,
is your anxiety cured because you prayed, paused and praised?
Yeah.
Here's what I would tell you.
I've won a lot of battles.
The Lord has won a lot of battles for me
because I've done just that.
But here's what I'll just tell you
because we live in a broken world
where we will have trials and struggles
through the rest of our lives, sad but true.
Anxiety is right around the corner.
Here's what I will tell you,
that when anxiety shows back up, we have a battle plan.
So you may not be dealing with anxiety right now,
but you will.
And if you do, don't think on it.
Give it to God, give it to God, give it to God.
What does it look like to have Jesus
in the midst of our anxieties?
Jesus reminds us it's not our battle, it's his,
because the battle belongs to him.
Jesus reminds us that he has done it before
and he will do it again, and if he's never done it for you,
he can do it for you now.
Because we see it in his word,
and we see it in the lives of those around us
that God can win this battle.
(gentle music)
I'm reminded that everything I could be anxious about,
everything you could be anxious about,
God is in control of.
Our battles are not against flesh and blood,
but against these powers and only Jesus can defeat them.
So I'm gonna pray for us.
We're gonna, I'm gonna walk you through praying,
pausing and praising during the sum of invitation.
So Lord Jesus, as we lead into invitation, Lord,
open our hearts and minds, Lord,
to what you are going to lead us to do
in this time of praying, pausing and praising.
So as we continue to pray, this is what I want you to do.
I want you to just begin to pray and think about the things
in which you are anxious about.
And I don't want you to dwell on those,
but I want you to bring them to your mind
because those are the ways that you're gonna be able
to lay them down at Jesus's feet.
So right where you are,
I'm challenging you to begin to just lay them down.
Say, Jesus, you can have my anxious thoughts
towards my finances.
Jesus, you can have my anxious thoughts
towards my broken family or my marriage that's struggling.
Jesus, you can have my anxiety towards my job
or my sickness.
You can have my anxiety towards this
exhausted feeling that I have.
Lay them down at Jesus' feet right now.
I'm praying that you lay them down right now.
Begin to say Jesus, they're yours.
(gentle music)
Lord Jesus, I'm praying for every person in this room, Lord,
that deals with anxiety.
God, you care.
God, I pray that your presence
is showing up in their lives right now.
God, I'm praying.
that they are laying down their cares before you
because you care for them.
Lord, remind them how powerful you are,
how you can pick those up, put them on the cross,
and you died for them.
You died for those cares.
Lord, meet them where they're at.
I want you to just take some time now
after you've laid them down, and I just want you to pause.
Pausing's so difficult.
So we're just gonna pause, take a minute or two,
and we're just gonna rest and just listen for the Lord
in some way, either through reminding part of the sermon
or Lord, maybe it's somehow they're just gonna remember
a scripture, Lord, you're gonna do something
in this time of pausing, so let's just pause
and rest in the Lord.
(gentle music)
(soft music)
[Music]
(gentle music)
So here's what I want you to do now.
This is gonna be the hard part.
I want you to begin to just sit right where you're at
and I want you to just give praise to the Lord.
Tell him thank you.
Say thank you, Lord, even though I can't see it,
you're working.
Lord, I want you to just sit right there.
I want you to all just sit right there and just say,
Lord, thank you for your word.
Again, you're maybe praising in faith and saying thank you,
even though you can't see that he has overcome your anxiety,
I want you to begin to praise him right now
and say thank you.
Say thank you, Lord, for dying on the cross for us
so that we could experience salvation
and renewing of our hearts and minds.
Just begin to thank him for who he is
and what he's done for you.
[Music]
(gentle music)
last thing that I want to encourage you with,
and maybe this is what I should have started with,
there's no promise that every person
that walked into this room has given their life to Jesus.
And the reason why I say that is because
if you don't know Jesus,
you've never given your life to Jesus,
you may not even know how to pray and how to pause
and how to praise because you haven't experienced
this transforming, saving faith in your life.
And so I just wanna challenge you today,
if you need to give your life to Jesus,
that you can do it now.
How do you give your life to Jesus?
It's simple, through faith.
By asking God to come into your life and save you.
To ask God to forgive you of your sins.
To ask God to transform your life.
To come in and to lead you.
And so I just wanna challenge you where you are.
I ask this every week.
If you wanna give your life to Jesus,
if you came in this room and you don't know Jesus,
but yet you wanna leave experience
and relationship with Jesus,
I just want you to raise your hand
'cause I wanna pray for you,
I wanna pray with you,
and I wanna encourage you where you're at.
And so if there's anybody in this room
that needs to give their lives to Jesus,
just raise your hand.
We're here to encourage you in your faith.
Okay.
So as we continue with invitation, this is the last thing.
We're gonna stand up
and we're gonna corporately praise together.
I think most of our battles that we'll win
will be when we link arms to praise.
Here's what I know, is that God is here to fight for you.
He's always been here to fight for you,
but maybe today you need to be reminded
that God is here to fight your battles.
Maybe it's anxiety, maybe you just need to fill in the blank,
whatever it is.
Let's praise today in advance for God to win the battles.
We fight our battles on our knees.
So let's worship together,
Let's stand together and praise God
during this time of imitation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[ Silence ]